Research Question: Do financial/investment advisors have a future when it comes to numerically beating the S&P 500 against LLMs?

Hypothesis: Advisors do not consistently outperform the market. I think AI and math models will improve performance. If AI significantly improves advisor returns, then advisors stay relevant. If AI alone beats advisors, the value of advisors drops.

This project’s methodology fits the research question because it answers the question of whether advisors have a future or not by the final price vs time graph.

No surveys, questionnaires, or consent forms are needed because this research project uses no human participants, and it is all to do with datasets.




Research Design
This study is a comparative research method where the goal is to see where advisors in the stock market can gain positive returns over the S&P 500.
This study should compare financial advisor stats to large language models and quantitative math models over the same time period.
The final goal should be to see a graph and make conclusions about financial advisors with the upcoming use of LLMs and new quantitative models.
If the results prove advisors are worse than LLMs, then the LLM's gains will be added to the advisor's gains to see the final graph of the combination.
All measurements should be compared under a money vs time graph.
This research should also use the same historical timeline in order ot make sure it is on the same grounds.
Must control outside variables or include them in the project.
All models made will be backtested using the same historical market data to evaluate performance.
Data Collection: There are TWO different types of data being collected.
Financial advisor performance data
To find how well advisors perform in the market, this research will use open-source data to find the gains or losses on the S&P 500. 
SPIVA scorecard 
Active vs Passive performance data from Morningstar
Cerulli Advisor returns
ANY published relevant data from large advisory firms, such as Wells Fargo
These sources need to provide advisor performance data, including whether they underperform or overperform the stock market. 
No personal or private advisor details are getting leaked, so there are no problems with privacy or security.y
S&P 500 Market Data
This research gets its S&P 500 market data from Yahoo Finance API and Python’s finance package.
Data needed from these things:
Daily or monthly closing prices
Total return index preferred
Dividends
These things act as the benchmark to compare with the advisor data
LLM & Quant Model Performance Data
Train an LLM model by using historical news and ask it to make buy/sell decisions at specific intervals.
Procedure:
1. Provide the LLM with news during the time period, with news headlines or earnings from specific data in history.
2. Ask it whether the market will go up or down and get a graph.
3. Convert responses into trading decisions
Do it for multiple LLMs like ChatGPT, Gemini, and Grok.
Mathematical Quant Model
Some simple models:
1. Moving average crossover
2. Relative strength index strategy
3. Momentum model
4. Mean reversion model
Anything to show the volatility spread.
Experimental Procedure
Timeline
2020-Present
Timeline must be the same for advisors, LLM model, and quant model
Collect and normalize data
Get data from SPIVA, Morningstar, and Cerulli
Normalize value to annual return, cumulative return, and drawdown.
This should become the advisor performance curve
Create LLM model
Gather historical data from the timeline(1990-2024).
Give LLM prompts like “Based on the following news from June 7, 1967, would an investor buy and hold the S&P 500? [And prompt the LLM the same for each month between the years.]”
Convert qualitative predictions to quantitative trades and the money the LLM would make over the time period
Generate a graph for total returns
This becomes the LLM performance curve.
Build and test the Quant model
Pull historical S&P 500 data
Apply mathematical rules 
Execute buy/sell signals algorithmically 
Graph results and calculate metrics
This is the Quant curve
Compare all curves (One advisor, One Quant model, Multiple LLMs)
S&P 500 Benchmark 
Advisor Performance 
LLM 
Quant Model 
Things being graphed: 
Cumulative return 
Annual returns MAIN PART 
Volatility
Data Analysis Plan
Cumulative Return (total growth of the portfolio) 
Annualized Return (average yearly growth) 
Maximum Drawdown (largest loss from a peak) 
Volatility (standard deviation of returns) 
Sharpe Ratio (risk-adjusted return)
How each metric is calculated
Daily returns are calculated by taking the percent change between consecutive days.
The annualized return formula: annual return = ((End value/Start value)^(1/years)) - 1
Volatility calculation: calculate daily returns, take the standard deviation of that, and annualize that by multiplying that by the square root of 252(number of trading days)
Sharpe ratio calculation: (Portfolio return - Risk-Free rate)/volatility
How are these calculations going to be interpreted?
The highest cumulative returns are the best overall
The highest Sharpe ratio shows the best risk-adjusted return
The lowest max drawdown shows the safest model
The advisors will be evaluated based on their normalized annual returns over the same time period, which is 2020-present.
If the LLM outperforms the returns and the Sharpe ratio, we can conclude that the LLM may be more reliable.
If the advisor and AI model perform12was3 best, advisors may remain useful when using LLMs
Comparing is the right method because this is the only way to determine if advisors still have a future, because if this research compares the results of advisors vs LLM, then it will be clear which one will be relevant in the future when it comes to advising.
Combine model(IF NEEDED)
If the LLM or quant model manages to beat the advisor in profits, then a new model will be created.
The best model will be combined with advisor returns to see if the new model with advisor returns will be able to perform at a much higher level than everything else and perform well above the market.
Materials needed
Python
Libraries: yfinance, pandas, matplotlib, numpy
LLMs for models
Excel to organize advisor data
Graphing library
Data inputs
SPIVA advisor returns
Yahoo Finance S&P 500 data
Historical news headlines only for LLM
Code for all models
Outputs needed
Line graph with all 4 strategies on the graph of the S&P 500
Risk and return metrics
Prompts used for LLMs
Code documentation for the quant model(just the GitHub repository)
Order of events/Timeline
Week 1-2: Gather S&P 500 data, advisor data, and past news to train the LLM
Week 3-4: Build a quant model
Week 4-5: Construct multiple LLM models for ChatGPT, Sonnet, Grok, and Gemini
Week 6: Run backtests and create graphs 
Week 7: Compare and combine if needed
Week 8: Analyze results
Feasibility
This project is very feasible as everything is free and public, and nothing is extremely hard to get.
The mathematical model uses basic quantitative techniques.
ALL public, nothing private.
Equation sheet for the quantitative model
Equations for returns and growth for quantitative model
Daily return formula - runs performance regardless of price level
rt=(Pt-Pt-t)/Pt-1
Rt - return on day t
Pt - price of the asset on day t
Pt - price of the asset on the previous day before t
Cumulative return - this is the equation graphed against the S&P 500
CR = t=tT(1+rt)-1
CR: cumulative return 
rt ​: return at time t
T: total number of trading days 
Annualized return - used to compare strategies over time
Rannual = (1+CR)252/t - 1
Rannual​- annualized return
CR- cumulative return
T- number of trading days
252- average number of trading days per year
Volatility - measures how much returns fluctuate
σ = 11-T t=1T(rt-r)2
σ - volatility
rt - daily return 
r - mean daily return 
T - number of observations
Sharpe Ratio -  Better return per unit of risk
S = Rannual-  Rfσ annual
S- Sharpe ratio
Rannual​- annualized return
Rf​- risk-free rate
σannual- annualized volatilitt
Maximum drawdown - Measures worst loss from peak to bottom and shows the quantity of crashes and how bad it was
Max Drawdown = maxt * (Peakt- TroughtTrought)
Peakt​- highest portfolio value before drop
Trought- lowest value after the highest
Portfolio return - preventing look-ahead bias which means a data analysis error where a model in this case this research’s quantitative model uses future information which unavailable at the time of decision-making.
rtportfolio = Signalt-1 * rt
Signalt−1: trading decision from previous day
rt: asset return

*****Note for me: once finished with code add snippets here to explain certain methods******
